---
layout: post
title: Traffic
tags: !!null 
---
The exact peak date of the [Hubbert
curve](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubbert_peak_theory) has been predicted by
many scientists but isn't known. And anyhow, it's not about exactness more
about communicating a period of transition for the oil industry, the
dependency on a status quo, the urgency in changing a collective mindset.

<!-- more -->

For me, [responsive design](http://www.alistapart.com/articles/responsive-web-
design/), [mobile first](http://www.lukew.com/ff/entry.asp?933), [rethinking
the mobile web](http://www.slideshare.net/bryanrieger/rethinking-the-mobile-
web-by-yiibu) all emerge from an analogous point in time where mobile internet
traffic will exceed desktop traffic. Not so much a question of 'if' but
'when'.

Either way, the mobile, tv, tablet markets will outstrip the growth of the
traditional 1024x768 desktop in the coming years and this will change the way
we think about building websites.

The status quo of designing fixed-width (or at least a _minimum width_)
interfaces for people with larger screens and then seeing the non-desktop
services as secondary projects becomes counterintuitive if the majority of
your audience are accessing your product by some other means, and that the
means becomes ever more varied.

If you build many _views_ of your service, which one gets the most investment
first?

The most capable platform? The one with the most users now? The one you think
might have the most users when you deliver the project? The one your
management team [uses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BlackBerry_Curve)?

Do you split your investment (and team) across each one thereby reducing your
velocity on each individual platform? Or do you linearise your projects and
stagger their delivery across a year or two?

Sure, companies can outsource or temporarily expand their teams to build
things in parallel, which isn't free, but when the money dries up you'll have
twice or thrice the amount of code to maintain and extend, which also isn't
free or sustainable.

You'll be chasing your tail whatever you pick unless you've got enough
developers to build & maintain a few versions of everything, but that is
really hard.

Responsive design solves the traffic problem by focusing development effort on
a single interface, your internal teams all become feature oriented, not
platform specialists.

