---
layout: post
title: Fluid grids, orientation & resolution independence
tags:
- screen typography
- responsive design
- css
- '16:9'
---
If you've spent any time building [responsive
websites](http://www.abookapart.com/products/responsive-web-design) with fluid
grids, you will have encountered the shock of seeing your beautiful portrait
layout distort when viewed in landscape mode (or vice-versa.)

Load up this [example page](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples
/resolution-independent-typography-1.html) on an iPad and change the
orientation to see the problem, or just check out the screengrabs.

<!-- more -->

1. [Fluid grid](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/resolution-
independent-typography-1.html) on iPad (portrait) | iPad
(landscape)![](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/img/res-fixed-
ipad.jpg)

This happens because whilst the layout and embedded content (images, video
etc) are sized in relation to the pixel width of the viewport, the typography
is not. And whilst it isn't too difficult to design with enough affordance for
the variation caused by the iPadâ€™s 4:3 aspect ratio - most (if not all)
Android tablets have 16:9 displays. These screens make the orientation
difference even more pronounced.

2. [Fluid grid](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/resolution-
independent-typography-1.html) on Galaxy Tab 10.1 (portrait) | Galaxy Tab 10.1
(landscape)![](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/img/res-fixed-
galaxy.jpg)

On the landscape 16:9 display our example page looks dreadful. There's more
internal whitespace inside that article than there is content, changing the
hierarchy of the page significantly.

We could patch the issue by adding a load of additional media-queries and
styles, but I don't think creating endless design variants for minor screen-
width differences really solves the problem. It's also getting a bit close to
designing for specific devices, whereas our goal with responsive design is to
design for interaction behaviours (eg; design for 'tablets', not 'iPad'.) We
should be able to create a single method of storytelling that works for all
tablet-sized devices without having to constantly rework details to account
for new form-factors.

## Create solutions,

not problems

I want to use media-queries to switch between interfaces for 'mobile',
'tablet' and 'desktop' viewport ranges so that I can provide appropriate
information density and linearity, and then have those interfaces scale to fit
individual form factors. The fluid grid works precisely this way, so what
we're looking for is a way to make the typography similarly scale in
proportion to the grid.

By [specifying our font sizes in ems](http://clagnut.com/blog/348/) we can
adjust every font-size on the page by using media-queries to change the font-
size set on the BODY or HTML element according to viewport width:

```css

        @media (min-width: 960px) {
            html {
                font-size: 12px;
            }
        }

        @media (max-width: 959px) {
            html {
                font-size: 10px;
            }
        }
```

This gives us a starting point - the styles will make your em-specified fonts
smaller when the viewport is narrower than 960px - but it's an arbitrary
resizing. I want the fonts to scale proportionally (eg; when the viewport is
50% of the 'target' width the grid will shrink to fit that viewport, so I want
the font-size to also be 50% of the 'target' font-size.) To do this, we need
to decide on a 'target' viewport width in order to calculate our proportions.
To make life simple, I'd suggest using the device you're designing with as
your 'target' viewport width (which in my case 768px - an iPad in portrait
orientation) so that you get a nice 10px:1em mapping between your font-sizes
in Creative Suite and those on the page.

Once I've decided on my target viewport of 768px (which I know I want to have
a font-size of 10px), I just need subdivide that viewport by 10 to create a
set of proportionally-correct font-size 'bands'.

3. Calculating a resolution independent font
scale![](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/img/res-independent-font-
scale.jpg)

Which looks like this in CSS:

```css

        @media (min-width: 858px) {
            html {
                font-size: 12px;
            }
        }

        @media (min-width: 780px) {
            html {
                font-size: 11px;
            }
        }

        @media (min-width: 702px) {
            html {
                font-size: 10px;
            }
        }

        @media (min-width: 724px) {
            html {
                font-size: 9px;
            }
        }

        @media (max-width: 623px) {
            html {
                font-size: 8px;
            }
        }
```

Which works beautifully in principle - but unfortunately we get some scaling
distortions due to em sizing being contextual to the font-sizing of _any_
parent DOM element, not just the HTML or BODY elements. Thankfully we do have
a better alternative to the em - [relative-em
sizing](http://snook.ca/archives/html_and_css/font-size-with-rem) - which is
contextual only to the HTML element and so perfect for this type of useage.
Rem support is pretty much universal on modern mobiles and tablets, and falls
back cleanly to px sizing if unsupported.

Check out a [revised version of the earlier example
page](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/resolution-independent-
typography-2.html) using the technique I've outlined above. It should scale
cleanly in most modern desktop browsers and tablets.

4. [Resolution independent grid](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples
/resolution-independent-typography-2.html) on iPad (portrait) | iPad
(landscape)![](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/img/res-
independent-ipad.jpg)

5. [Resolution independent grid](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples
/resolution-independent-typography-2.html) on Galaxy Tab 10.1 (portrait) |
Galaxy Tab 10.1 (landscape)![](http://static.responsivenews.co.uk/examples/img
/res-independent-galaxy.jpg)

## Examples in the wild

In the last couple of months a few sites have launched using similar
approaches.

[Browns recent redesign](http://brownsdesign.com/about/) is a horizontal-
scrolling site, so they rather brilliantly use the height of the viewport set
the base font-size in order to prevent the text from spilling below the scroll
area.

A few weeks after Browns site launched, Clearleft unveiled their placeholder
site for [Ampersand 2012](http://2012.ampersandconf.com/), using the viewport
width to set the base em size for the design.

_Note._ This article is a revised and expanded version of an
[article](http://blog.mhurrell.co.uk/post/6806897529/fluid-grids-and-
orientation) I wrote on my personal blog in June 2011.

